# F-150-Fuel

The Ford F-150 is the best selling vehicle in the USA. The fully electric 2022 F-150 Lightning joins the standard gas-powered and hybrid model F-150s, which allows us to make an apples to apples comparison of the fuel costs of driving all three versions of the F-150. This repository contains the F-150_Analysis Jupyter Notebook that uses gas and electricity data from the US Energy Information Administration, and EPA vehicle fuel efficiency data to estimate fuel costs of driving each truck. 

Electric vehicles are better for the environment as they produce no tailpipe emissions, which offsets their higher manufacturing emissions (Wolfram et al., 2021) after only a few years of driving. Another advantage of electric vehicles is their lower cost of ownership due to reduced maintenance and lower electricity costs compared to gas. However, electric vehicles typically cost more than equivalent gas-powered vehicles, which begs the question of how long would it take for the lower cost of ownership to compensate for the higher purchase cost when compared to a gas-powered vehicle?

This analysis only takes into account the cost of fuel, the posted MSRP, and the EPA estimated fuel efficiency for the different trucks. There are other potential cost savings available for the purchase of new electric vehicles such as the [federal EV tax credit](https://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/taxevb.shtml) up to $7,500, which would offset the higher cost of the F-150 Lightning even more. The F-150 Lightning still qualifies for the full $7,500 tax credit making it cheaper than the equivalent gas-powered version from the start. Further cost savings of owning an EV include no oil changes and overall lower maintenance, which affect the total cost of ownership. These additional costs are not taken into account in this analysis.

There are also additional costs to owning an EV, which are not included in this analysis. The major additional cost is the purchase and installation of a level 2 charger to charge at home.

The national average driving distance for [2018](https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/onh00/bar8.htm) is 13,476 miles per year or about 37 miles per day. This notebook compares the fuel costs of the gas-powered, hybrid, and EV models of the Ford F-150 for driving 37 miles per day with both all city driving and all highway driving. EVs have a greater fuel efficiency advantage over gas, especially for city driving conditions, so comparing city and highway driving conditions will give the full range of potential fuel cost savings.

The MSRPs for the different versions of the F-150 were found on the Ford website on August 29, 2022 using the [build your vehicle feature](https://shop.ford.com/configure/f150-lightning/config/paint/Config%5B%7CFord%7CF-150%20Lightning%7C2023%7C1%7C1.%7C312A.W1E..PUM...99V.66A.775.%5D?gnav=shopnav-bp). The base model of the F-150 Lightning XLT was used and the gas-powered and hybrid versions were adjusted to have the equivalent features as the Lightning to compare the cost of similar trucks. 

This analysis only gives an estimate of the total cost of ownership of these vehicles and is meant as a comparison among three similar trucks using typical driving distances and estimates of fuel efficiency and average fuel costs in the US. Actual costs of driving these vehicles will vary depending on driving style, fuel quality, where you drive, etc.
